&emsp;
# Classification of Robots

Robot manipulators can be classified by several criteria, such as their power source, or way in which the joints are actuated, their geometry, or kinematic structure, their intended application area, or their method of control. Such classification is useful primarily in order to determine which robot is right for a given task. For example, an hydraulic robot would not be suitable for food handling or clean room applications, whereas a SCARA robot would not be suitable for work in a foundry. We explain this in more detail below.

&emsp;
## 1 Power Source
Typically, robots are either electrically, hydraulically, or pneumatically powered. 

Hydraulic actuators are unrivaled in their speed of response and torque producing capability. Therefore hydraulic robots are used primarily for lifting heavy loads. The drawbacks of hydraulic robots are that they tend to leak hydraulic fluid, require much more peripheral equipment, such as pumps, which also requires more maintenance, and they are noisy. 

Robots driven by DC- or AC-servo motors are increasingly popular since they are cheaper, cleaner and quieter. Pneumatic robots are inexpensive and simple but cannot be controlled precisely.As a result, pneumatic robots are limited in their range of applications and popularity.

&emsp;
## 2 Application Area
The largest projected area of future application of robots is in assembly. Therefore, robots are often classified by application into assembly and non-assembly robots. 

>Assembly Robots
- Assembly robots tend to be small, electrically driven and either revolute or SCARA (described below) in design. 
>Nonassembly Robots
- The main nonassembly application areas to date have been in welding, spray painting, material handling, and machine loading and unloading.

&emsp;
## 3 Method of Control
Robots are classified by control method into:
- servo robots 
- non-servo robots

### 3.1 Non-Servo Robots
The earliest robots were non-servo robots. These robots are essentially open-loop devices whose movement is limited to predetermined mechanical stops, and they are useful primarily for materials transfer. In fact, according to the definition given previously, fixed stop robots hardly qualify as robots. 

### 3.2 Servo Robots
Servo robots use closed-loop computer control to determine their motion and are thus capable of being truly multifunctional, reprogrammable devices.

Servo controlled robots are further classified according to the method that the controller uses to guide the end-effector. The simplest type of robot in this class is the point-to-point robot. 

### 3.3 Point-to-Point Robot
A point-to-point robot can be taught a discrete set of points but there is no control on the path of the end-effector in between taught points. Such robots are usually taught a series of points with a teach pendant. The points are then stored and played back. 

Point-to-point robots are severely limited in their range of applications. 

In continuous path robots, on the other hand, the entire path of the end-effector can be controlled. For example, the robot end-effector can be taught to follow a straight line between two points or even to follow a contour such as a welding seam. In addition, the velocity and/or acceleration of the end-effector can often be controlled. These are the most advanced robots and require the most sophisticated computer controllers and software development.

&emsp;
## 4 Geometry
Most industrial manipulators at the present time have six or fewer degrees-of-freedom. These manipulators are usually classified kinematically on the basis of the first three joints of the arm, with the wrist being described separately. The majority of these manipulators fall into one of five geometric types: 
- articulate (RRR)
- spherical (RRP)
- SCARA(RRP)
- cylindrical (RPP)
- cartesian (PPP)

We discuss each of these in detail below. Each of these five configurations are serial link robots. A sixth and fundamentally distinct class of manipulators is the so-called parallel
robot. In a parallel configuration the links are arranged in a closed rather than open kinematic chain. We include a discussion of the parallel robot for completeness as parallel robots are becoming increasingly common.