&emsp;
# Velocity Kinematics

In order to follow a contour at constant velocity, or at any prescribed velocity, we must know the relationship between the velocity of the tool and the joint velocities. In this case we can differentiate Equations $(1.1)$ and $(1.2)$ to obtain

$$\dot{x} = -α_1 sin θ_1 · \dot{θ}_1 − α_2 sin(θ_1 + θ_2)(\dot{θ}_1 + \dot{θ}_2) \tag{1.10}$$
$$\dot{y} = α_1 cos θ_1 · \dot{θ}_1 − α_2 cos(θ_1 + θ_2)(\dot{θ}_1 + \dot{θ}_2) \tag{1.11}$$


Using the vector notation we may write these equations as


The matrix $J$ defined by $(1.11)$ is called the Jacobian of the manipulator and is a fundamental object to determine for any manipulator. In Chapter 5 we present a systematic procedure for deriving the Jacobian for any manipulator in the so-called cross-product form.

The determination of the joint velocities from the end-effector velocities is conceptually simple since the velocity relationship is linear. Thus the joint velocities are found from the end-effector velocities via the inverse Jacobian

$$\dot{\pmb{θ}} = J^{-1}\dot{\pmb{x}} \tag{1.12}$$

where $J^{−1}$ is given by

$$J^{-1} = \frac{1}{α_1α_2 θ_2}\begin{bmatrix}
α_2c_{θ_1+θ_2} & α_2s_{θ_1+θ_2} \\

\end{bmatrix}$$

in which $c_θ$ and $s_θ$ denote respectively $cos θ$ and $sin θ$. The determinant, det $J$, of the Jacobian in $(1.11)$ is $α_1α_2 sin θ_2$. 

The Jacobian does not have an inverse, therefore, when
$θ_2 = 0$ or $π$, in which case the manipulator is said to be in a `singular configuration`, such as shown in Figure $1.28$ for $θ_2 = 0$. The determination of such singular configurations is important for several reasons. At singular configurations there are infinitesimal motions that are unachievable; that is, the manipulator end-effector cannot move in certain directions. In the above cases the end effector cannot move in the direction parallel to $x_2$, from a singular configuration. Singular configurations are also related to the non-uniqueness of solutions of the inverse kinematics. For example, for a given end-effector position, there are in general two possible solutions to the inverse kinematics. Note that the singular configuration separates these two solutions in the sense that the manipulator cannot go from one configuration to the other without passing through the singularity. For many applications it is important to plan manipulator motions in such a way that singular configurations are avoided.