&emsp;
# Rotation with respect to the current coordinate frame

$$p^0 = R^0_1p^1\tag{2.27}$$

Recall that the matrix $R^0_1$ in Equation (2.27) represents a rotational transformation between the frames $o_0x_0y_0z_0$ and $o_1x_1y_1z_1$. 

Suppose we now add a third coordinate frame $o_2x_2y_2z_2$ related to the frames $o_0x_0y_0z_0$ and $o_1x_1y_1z_1$ by rotational transformations. As we saw above, a given point $p$ can then be represented by coordinates specified with respect to any of these three frames: $p_0$, $p_1$ and $p_2$. The relationship between these representations of $p$ is

$$p^0 = R^0_1p^1 \tag{2.34}$$
$$p^1 = R^1_2p^2 \tag{2.35}$$
$$p^0 = R^0_2p^2 = R^0_1R^1_2 p^2\tag{2.36}$$

where each $R_{ij}$ is a rotation matrix, and equation (2.36) follows directly by substituting equation (2.35) into equation (2.34). Note that $R^0_1$ and $R^0_2$ represent rotations relative to the frame $o_0x_0y_0z_0$ while $R^2_1$ represents a rotation relative to the frame $o_1x_1y_1z_1$.

From equation (2.36) we can immediately infer the identity

$$R^0_2 = R^0_1R^1_2 \tag{2.37}$$

Equation (2.37) is the composition law for rotational transformations. It states that, in order to transform the coordinates of a point $p$ from its representation $p_2$ in the frame $o_2x_2y_2z_2$ to its representation $p_0$ in the frame $o_0x_0y_0z_0$, we may first transform to its coordinates $p_1$ in the frame $o_1x_1y_1z_1$ using $R^2_1$ and then transform $p_1$ to $p_0$ using $R^0_1$.

We may also interpret Equation (2.37) as follows. Suppose initially that all three of the coordinate frames coincide. We first rotate the frame $o_2x_2y_2z_2$ relative to $o_0x_0y_0z_0$ according to the transformation $R^0_1$. Then, with the frames $o_1x_1y_1z_1$ and $o_2x_2y_2z_2$ coincident, we rotate $o_2x_2y_2z_2$ relative to $o_1x_1y_1z_1$ according to the transformation $R^2_1$. In each case we call the frame relative to which the rotation occurs the current frame.

&emsp;
## Example 2.4 
Henceforth, whenever convenient we use the shorthand notation $c_θ = cos θ$, $s_θ = sin θ$ for trigonometric functions. Suppose a rotation matrix $R$ represents a rotation of $φ$ degrees about the current y-axis followed by a rotation of $θ$ degrees about the current z-axis. Refer to Figure 2.9. Then the matrix $R$ is given by

$$R = R_{y, \phi} R_{z, \theta} \tag{2.38}$$
$$\qquad\qquad= \begin{bmatrix}c_{\phi} & 0 & s_{\phi} \\
0 & 1 & 0 \\ -s_{\phi} & 0 & c_{\phi}\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}
c_{\theta} & -s_{\theta} & 0 \\
s_{\theta} & c_{\theta} & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1
\end{bmatrix}$$

$$=\begin{bmatrix}
c_{\phi}c_{\theta} & -c_{\phi}s_{\theta} & s_{\phi} \\
s_{\phi} & c_{\phi} & 0 \\ 
-s_{\phi}c_{\theta} & s_{\phi}s_{\theta} & c_{\phi}
\end{bmatrix}$$

It is important to remember that the order in which a sequence of rotations are carried out, and consequently the order in which the rotation matrices are multiplied together, is crucial. The reason is that rotation, unlike position, is not a vector quantity and is therefore not subject to the laws of vector addition, and so rotational transformations do not commute in general.

&emsp;
## Example 2.5 

Suppose that the above rotations are performed in the reverse order, that is, first a rotation about the current z-axis followed by a rotation about the current y-axis.
Then the resulting rotation matrix is given by


$$R = R_{z, \theta} R_{y, \phi} \tag{2.39}$$
$$\qquad\qquad= \begin{bmatrix}
c_{\theta} & -s_{\phi} & 0 \\
s_{\theta} & c_{\theta} & 0 \\ 
0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}
c_{\phi} & 0 & s_{\phi} \\
0 & 1 & 0 \\ -s_{\phi} & 0 & c_{\phi}
\end{bmatrix}$$

$$=\begin{bmatrix}
c_{\theta}c_{\phi} & -s_{\theta} & c_{\theta}s_{\phi} \\
s_{\theta}c_{\phi} & c_{\theta} & s_{\theta}s_{\phi} \\ 
-s_{\phi} & 0 & c_{\phi}
\end{bmatrix}$$



Comparing (2.38) and (2.39) we see that $R \neq R'$.


